\input texinfo
@setfilename ind.info
@settitle ind Manual
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2026 Paul Henry.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute, and modify this manual under
the terms chosen for the @code{ind} package.
@end copying

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* ind: (ind).                   Display a multi-calendar summary.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title ind
@subtitle A multi-calendar summary for Emacs
@author Paul Henry
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top ind

@command{ind} displays the current date in a variety of civil,
historical, religious, astronomical, regnal, and idiosyncratic systems.

This manual explains the principal calendars, cycles, observances, and
continuous day counts represented in the display.  For the command
itself, type @kbd{M-x ind}.
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::
* Using ind::
* Dating Systems::
* Computistical Values::
* Continuous Day Counts::
* Traditional Observances::
* Alternative Calendars::
* Sources and Further Reading::
* Concept Index::
@end menu


@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

@command{ind} is an Emacs Lisp successor to the Bash script of the same
name.  It presents a compact summary of the current date using numerous
systems of year numbering, calendrical computation, traditional
observance, and chronological reckoning.

The display may include the Byzantine year and indiction, Roman AUC,
the Masoretic year, Japanese imperial dating, traditional Asian
calendars, computistical values, astronomical day counts, Buddhist
observances, quarter days, and several alternative calendars.

The command is intended as a daily calendrical reference rather than as
a general-purpose date-conversion library.


@node Using ind
@chapter Using ind

Invoke the display with:

@example
M-x ind
@end example

The principal command has the following purpose:

@quotation
Display a multi-calendar summary for today.

Show civil, historical, religious, astronomical, regnal, and
idiosyncratic representations of the current date.
@end quotation

The individual values are described in the following chapters.


@node Dating Systems
@chapter Dating Systems

@menu
* Hebrew Calendar::
* Roman AUC::
* Byzantine Calendar::
* Indictions::
* Julian Period::
* Japanese Imperial Dating::
* Chinese Calendar::
* Tibetan Calendar::
* Buddhist Era::
* Masoretic Dating::
@end menu


@node Hebrew Calendar
@section Hebrew Calendar

The Hebrew or Jewish calendar is a lunisolar calendar used principally
for Jewish religious observance and, together with the Gregorian
calendar, for civil purposes in Israel.

Twelve lunar months are approximately eleven days shorter than a solar
year.  The Hebrew calendar therefore employs a 19-year Metonic cycle,
inserting an additional month in seven years of each cycle to keep the
months aligned with the seasons.

Hebrew years are numbered according to an @dfn{Anno Mundi}, or
``year of the world,'' era.  The conventional epoch falls in 3761 BCE
when expressed in the proleptic Julian calendar.  Because Hebrew days
begin at sunset and because several epoch conventions appear in
secondary literature, apparently differing civil dates may refer to
the same traditional epoch.

@node Roman AUC
@section Roman AUC

@dfn{Ab urbe condita}, commonly abbreviated AUC, means ``from the
founding of the City.''  The City is Rome, whose traditional foundation
is assigned to 753 BCE in the chronology associated with Varro.

AUC numbering is convenient for modern chronological comparison, but
it was not the ordinary Roman method of naming years.  Romans commonly
identified a year by the names of its consuls.  Regnal years and other
official eras were also used in particular periods and jurisdictions.

@node Byzantine Calendar
@section Byzantine Calendar

The Byzantine calendar is also called the Creation Era of
Constantinople, the Byzantine Era, or the Byzantine @i{Anno Mundi}.  It
was used by the Byzantine Empire and by parts of the Eastern Orthodox
world.

The system is based on the Julian calendar, but numbers its years from
a calculated creation of the world.  Its year begins on September 1.
Year 1 extended from September 1, 5509 BCE, through August 31,
5508 BCE.

Consequently, the Byzantine year corresponding to a Gregorian date
depends not only on the civil year but also on whether the date falls
before or after September 1.

@node Indictions
@section Indictions

An @dfn{indiction} is a year within a recurring 15-year cycle used in
late Roman and medieval administration and document dating.

Each year of the cycle is numbered from 1 through 15.  Since the cycles
themselves were not normally numbered, an indiction number alone does
not uniquely identify a historical year.

Different historical conventions began the indiction year on different
dates.  A calendrical program should therefore state or consistently
apply the convention it uses.

@node Julian Period
@section Julian Period

The @dfn{Julian Period} is a chronological cycle of 7,980 years devised
by Joseph Justus Scaliger.  It combines three traditional cycles:

@itemize @bullet
@item
the 15-year indiction cycle;
@item
the 28-year solar cycle; and
@item
the 19-year lunar or Metonic cycle.
@end itemize

The first year of the present Julian Period is 4713 BCE in conventional
historical notation, corresponding to astronomical year @minus{}4712.
The next Julian Period begins in 3268 CE.

The Julian Period should not be confused with the Julian calendar or
with the Julian Date continuous day count.

@node Japanese Imperial Dating
@section Japanese Imperial Dating

Japanese dates may be expressed by imperial era name and regnal year.
Each era begins with the accession or formal inauguration of a new
emperor, and the first partial calendar year is numbered year 1.

A distinct nationalist year count, sometimes called the imperial year
or @i{koki}, numbers years from the legendary foundation of Japan by
Emperor Jimmu in 660 BCE.  It is historically and conceptually
different from ordinary era-name dating.

@node Chinese Calendar
@section Chinese Calendar

The traditional Chinese calendar is lunisolar.  Its months are related
to lunar phases, while intercalary months keep the calendar aligned
with the solar year and seasonal cycle.

Although the Gregorian calendar is used for ordinary civil dating,
the traditional calendar continues to govern festivals such as Chinese
New Year and the Lantern Festival.  Traditional year designations may
also combine a heavenly stem and earthly branch in a repeating
60-year cycle.

@node Tibetan Calendar
@section Tibetan Calendar

The Tibetan calendar is lunisolar and normally contains twelve lunar
months.  An intercalary month is inserted when required to keep the
calendar aligned with the solar year.

The Phukpa tradition is the principal calendrical system used in much
of Tibetan culture.  Tibetan New Year, or @dfn{Losar}, ordinarily falls
in February or March of the Gregorian calendar, though its date need
not coincide with Chinese New Year.

@node Buddhist Era
@section Buddhist Era

The term @dfn{Buddhist calendar} refers to a family of related
lunisolar and solar calendars used in mainland Southeast Asia and Sri
Lanka for religious, traditional, or civil purposes.

The Buddhist Era is also a system of year numbering.  Its offset from
the Common Era differs according to regional convention and whether a
date falls before or after the traditional new year.  A displayed
Buddhist year should therefore be understood in the context of the
specific convention used by the program.

@node Masoretic Dating
@section Masoretic Dating

In @command{ind}, @dfn{Masoretic dating} denotes a simple ceremonial
or commemorative year count obtained by adding 4000 to the Gregorian
year.  It resembles an @i{Anno Mundi} system but should not be confused
with the calculated year of the Hebrew calendar.

The name and offset are used here as a feature of the program's
traditional output, not as a claim that this is a standard civil
calendar.


@node Computistical Values
@chapter Computistical Values

@dfn{Computus} is the body of calendrical calculation traditionally
used to determine the date of Easter and related ecclesiastical dates.

@menu
* Metonic Cycle and Golden Number::
* Epact::
* Dominical Letters::
* Ides::
@end menu


@node Metonic Cycle and Golden Number
@section Metonic Cycle and Golden Number

The Metonic cycle is a period of 19 solar years after which the phases
of the Moon recur on approximately the same dates of the solar year.

The @dfn{golden number} assigns each year a number from 1 through 19,
indicating its place in the Metonic cycle.  Golden numbers were used in
medieval computus and in perpetual and Runic calendars.

@node Epact
@section Epact

The @dfn{epact} expresses the age of the ecclesiastical Moon at the
beginning of the solar year, or equivalently the accumulated difference
between solar and lunar reckoning under a particular computistical
system.

Because twelve lunar months are roughly eleven days shorter than the
solar year, the epact normally advances by eleven from one year to the
next, subject to the corrections of the calendar in use.

@node Dominical Letters
@section Dominical Letters

A @dfn{dominical letter}, or Sunday letter, is one of the letters A
through G assigned to a year for finding Sundays in a fixed-date
calendar.

A common year has one dominical letter.  A leap year has two because
the insertion of February 29 changes the correspondence between
calendar dates and weekdays after February.

@node Ides
@section Ides

The @dfn{Ides} was one of the named reference days of the Roman month.
It fell on the fifteenth day of March, May, July, and October, and on
the thirteenth day of the other months.

Roman dates were ordinarily expressed by counting inclusively backward
from the Kalends, Nones, or Ides rather than by numbering every day
consecutively from the start of the month.


@node Continuous Day Counts
@chapter Continuous Day Counts

Continuous day counts identify dates or instants by numbering
successive days without dividing them into calendar years and months.

@menu
* Julian Date::
* Modified Julian Date::
* Truncated Julian Date::
* Rata Die::
@end menu


@node Julian Date
@section Julian Date

The @dfn{Julian Date}, or JD, is a continuous count of days and
fractions of a day from noon on January 1, 4713 BCE in the proleptic
Julian calendar.

Because Julian Dates identify instants rather than merely civil dates,
precise work should also state the time scale being used.

@node Modified Julian Date
@section Modified Julian Date

The @dfn{Modified Julian Date}, or MJD, is defined by:

@example
MJD = JD - 2400000.5
@end example

Its epoch is midnight at the beginning of November 17, 1858.  The
half-day subtraction moves the boundary from astronomical noon to civil
midnight, while the larger subtraction shortens the displayed number.

@node Truncated Julian Date
@section Truncated Julian Date

The name @dfn{Truncated Julian Date}, or TJD, has been used for more
than one shortened Julian-date convention.

The convention historically used by @command{ind} is associated with
NASA's PB-5 spacecraft time code and counts days from MJD 44000,
corresponding to May 24, 1968.  The original field allowed a four-digit
day count in a 14-bit representation; the later PB-5J form enlarged the
field to 16 bits.

Because other technical sources use ``truncated Julian date'' for
different subtractions, the epoch or formula should always accompany
the abbreviation TJD.

@node Rata Die
@section Rata Die

@dfn{Rata Die}, abbreviated RD, is a continuous count of calendar days
used in calendrical calculation.  Day 1 is January 1, 1 CE in the
proleptic Gregorian calendar.

The expression is Latin for ``fixed day'' or ``reckoned day.''  Some
implementations extend the integer day count with a fractional part for
time of day.


@node Traditional Observances
@chapter Traditional Observances

@menu
* Quarter and Cross-quarter Days::
* Scottish Term and Quarter Days::
* Uposatha::
@end menu


@node Quarter and Cross-quarter Days
@section Quarter and Cross-quarter Days

In British and Irish tradition, quarter days were customary dates for
the beginning of school terms, the hiring of servants, and the payment
of rents and other debts.

The English quarter days are:

@table @asis
@item Lady Day
March 25, the Feast of the Annunciation.
@item Midsummer Day
June 24, the Nativity of Saint John the Baptist.
@item Michaelmas
September 29, the Feast of Saint Michael and All Angels.
@item Christmas
December 25.
@end table

The traditional cross-quarter days fall approximately midway between
the quarter days:

@table @asis
@item Candlemas
February 2.
@item May Day
May 1.
@item Lammas
August 1.
@item All Hallows
November 1.
@end table

The names and legal significance of these days vary among regions and
historical periods.

@node Scottish Term and Quarter Days
@section Scottish Term and Quarter Days

The old Scottish term and quarter days are traditionally given as:

@table @asis
@item Candlemas
February 2.
@item Whitsun
May 15.
@item Lammas
August 1.
@item Martinmas
November 11.
@end table

Candlemas is associated with the Presentation of Christ and the
Blessing of Candles.  Whitsun derives from Pentecost, though the legal
Scottish date became fixed rather than movable.  Lammas takes its name
from ``loaf mass'' and was associated with the first fruits of harvest.
Martinmas is the feast of Saint Martin of Tours.

The Term and Quarter Days (Scotland) Act 1990 defines the modern
Scottish quarter days as February 28, May 28, August 28, and
November 28.  May 28 and November 28 are the modern term days.

@node Uposatha
@section Uposatha

@dfn{Uposatha} is a recurring Buddhist day of observance.  Monastics
and lay followers may intensify meditation, study, generosity, and
observance of the precepts.

The frequency and precise calculation of Uposatha vary among Buddhist
traditions.  In Theravada communities it is commonly associated with
the new moon, full moon, and intervening quarter phases.

Four especially prominent full-moon observances are:

@table @asis
@item Magha Puja
A commemoration of the early Sangha, ordinarily observed in February
or March.
@item Vesak
A principal commemoration of the Buddha, ordinarily observed in May.
@item Asalha Puja
A commemoration of the first sermon, ordinarily observed in July.
@item Pavarana
The observance marking the close of the rains retreat, ordinarily in
October.
@end table


@node Alternative Calendars
@chapter Alternative Calendars

@menu
* Hanke-Henry Permanent Calendar::
* Discordian Calendar::
@end menu


@node Hanke-Henry Permanent Calendar
@section Hanke-Henry Permanent Calendar

The Hanke-Henry Permanent Calendar is a proposed leap-week calendar.
A common year contains 364 days, exactly 52 weeks.  An additional week
is inserted at intervals to keep the calendar aligned with the solar
year.

Because every ordinary year has the same number of complete weeks,
calendar dates fall on the same weekday from year to year.  The broader
proposal has also been associated with replacing civil time zones with
Coordinated Universal Time.

@node Discordian Calendar
@section Discordian Calendar

The Discordian or Erisian calendar is an alternative calendar described
in the @cite{Principia Discordia}.  Its year begins on January 1 of the
Gregorian calendar and contains five seasons of 73 days:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Chaos;
@item
Discord;
@item
Confusion;
@item
Bureaucracy; and
@item
The Aftermath.
@end itemize

Discordian years are labelled YOLD, ``Year of Our Lady of Discord.''
The customary conversion adds 1166 to the Gregorian year.

The Discordian clock is a related alternative division of the day
derived from the Erisian Klock specification.


@node Sources and Further Reading
@chapter Sources and Further Reading

The explanatory notes in the original @command{ind} man page were
assembled chiefly from general reference material.  This manual revises
that prose and distinguishes technical definitions from historical
summary.

Useful starting points include:

@itemize @bullet
@item
United States Naval Observatory, @cite{Introduction to Calendars},
@uref{https://aa.usno.navy.mil/faq/calendars}.
@item
United States Naval Observatory, @cite{Julian Date Converter},
@uref{https://aa.usno.navy.mil/data/JulianDate}.
@item
United States Naval Observatory, @cite{Astronomical Applications
Glossary}, especially the entries for Julian Date and Modified Julian
Date, @uref{https://aa.usno.navy.mil/faq/asa_glossary}.
@item
United States Naval Observatory, @cite{The Jewish Calendar},
@uref{https://aa.usno.navy.mil/faq/jewish}.
@item
A. R. Chi, @cite{A Grouped Binary Time Code for Telemetry and Space
Application}, NASA, 1979.
@item
@cite{Term and Quarter Days (Scotland) Act 1990}, 1990 c. 22.
@item
Edward M. Reingold and Nachum Dershowitz, @cite{Calendrical
Calculations}.
@end itemize

Wikipedia remains useful for orientation and for locating further
sources, but it should not be treated as the sole authority for a
technical or historical definition.

@node Concept Index
@unnumbered Concept Index

@printindex cp

@bye

@c Local Variables:
@c compile-command: "makeinfo --no-split -o ind.info ind.texi"
@c TeX-master: t
@c End:
